---
layout: post
title: peat!
---
Today I googled how to make soil less alkaline. In texas the high concentration of limestone and other minerals means our soil tends to lean towards the high-pH end of the spectrum, meaning the salts and minerals that make their way into our soil tend to make the solution basic. The internet told me to purchase some peat. so I did. 

But after thinking about it, I'm realizing a few things. for one, I only have a vague memory of doing titrations and using litmus strips to measure acidity. But also, What on earth does acidity even mean? Why does insufficiently acidic soil matter? and why _peat?_ 

A quick refresh: 
- _by definition_ (Bronsted and Lowry, 1923 - those names ring a bell!), an **acid** is a substance that **donates a proton** to any chemicals added to the solution. A **base** is a substance that accepts a proton. 
- So, roughly speaking, the relative acidity of a substance is a measure of the free (ionized, ie, without an electron) hydrogen atoms are floating around ready to pounce on any incoming chemicals. 
- If any ion or anion is floating around, the abundance of free protons mean those ion/anions have electrons ready to cling to those hydrogen atoms or are ready to snag a new hydrogen atom to balance the charge of the compound. When abundant, anything mixed with the acidic (high hydrogen concentration) substance will react readily and vigorously with all those hydrogen atoms floating around. Hydrogen will pounce on any molecule that has extra electrons, changing their shape, charge, and reactivity; they'll break existing molecular bonds, they'll deactivate or activate proteins, they'll reverse reactions in equilibrium, or they'll just steal electrons. These are the effects of what we call acidity! 

Soil. Back to soil. 

In general, soil holds on to electrolytes (plant nutrients) by maintaining a very specific pH that allows it to retain Calcium (Ca²⁺), Magnesium (Mg²⁺), Potassium (K⁺), Iron (Fe²⁺ / Fe³⁺), and Ammonium (NH₄⁺)

When a soil is too acidic, the free hydrogen atoms latch on to the soil magnets and bump out the nutrients for the plants. A basic/alkaline soil suffers the opposite problem - not enough reactivity, so the soil has no one to compete with to hold on to the nutrients, meaning they don't get to leave to travel up the plant roots. They're stuck! In essence the hydrogen concentration in the soil is like a regulator controlling how available nutrients are to the plants that hang out there. 

Central texas used to be a very large shallow sea and got a hefty layer of Calcium carbonate deposited on the ground over the millenia. We're not a sea anymore, and haven't been for a long time, so all of this is now bedrock with bits and pieces mixed into the topsoil. 

Because carbonate is a really strong base, and we generally get low rainfall, there is not much washing away or reacting with the strongly basic components of the soil. Or at least not as much as there would be in other areas. So as the limestone weathers, the carbonate is released, neutralizes any existing hydrogen atoms in the soil, and makes the soil generally quite alkaline. 

So ... I googled how to make the soil more acidic. This could technically be done in a few ways. For one, I could find some, like, Hydrochloric acid and mix it in the soil. That's a bad idea for a few reasons, probably. Idk -- I didn't really investigate it. 

But **Peat Moss** turns out to be an excellent source of acidity for your too-alkaline soil. Peat moss comes from sphagnum moss which is the dominant plant in peat bogs. It absorbs positively charged cations from water and releases good-old hydrogen ions in return. The answer you get from google is sorta unsatisfying, or at least overly chemistry-y: 

> `2R–H (Sphagnum's surface) + Ca²⁺ → (R)₂Ca + 2H⁺` 
> For every calcium ion absorbed, two H⁺ ions are released into the water. This increases H⁺ concentration → lowers pH → more acidic environment.

If you zoom out a bit, sometimes the earth gets holes. Holes and pits. Sometimes really big ones. Like a dried lake or riverbed, or the big pit where a melted glacier used to be. 
Rain water flows in. But it's in a hole! So there's not really a reliable way for the water to fly out. Over time, the soil soaks up all the water it can hold, and you're left with no air pockets anywhere - a muddy pit with no oxygen. 
A wet pit of moist soil seems like a relatively great place for plants, though, so it's not completely evident how something strange starts to happen, at least not initially. There are competing theories on this (apparently), but one general ecological perspective is that: 
1. You have a pit. Some sort of lowland that doesn't have good drainage. Glacier pit. 
2. Plants grow in the pit, or outside of it. Over time, the plants die and decompose, rain water sort of sliding them down into the bottom. 
3. The accumulation of organic matter trap sediment and water flow, allowing water in but not out. Water doesn't really pool, since sediment is always falling on top of it and soaking it up. You sort of just end up with mud. 
4. Plants don't generally like anaerobic soil. They need air pockets for water drainage or they'll suffocate. Also, for reasons above, they need a particular pH to get their nutrients. mmm potassium. 
5. Along comes along SPHAGNUM. This fucker is no joke. They evolved in ecologically tough conditions to be able to handle lack of oxygen and high acidity ... but these hooligans were like baby boomers that paid for college by working full time at a chilis. It's not enough to be glad they made it through ok. They need everyone else to suffer too. 
6. SPHAGNUM more or less found out that it did better when in harsh conditions, because it had less competition. So over time, THEY EVOLVED TO MAKE IT MORE HARSH FOR EVERYONE ELSE. Some things they learned: 
	1. They evolved to absorb their nutrients from the soil instead of through water, releasing hydrogen ions in exchange. They react _with_ their food, instead of, you know, eating it . I wonder what it'd be like to walk up to a plate of eggs and touch it, absorbing the egg protein and slowly transmorphing the plate of eggs into a plate of poop. 
	2. They get their nutrients and in the process make the soil less nutrient available for everyone else. Great. They ALSO evolved the ability to hold 30 times their weight in water. So this bog is not drying out ANYTIME soon. You think you're cool because you evolved the ability to be drough resistance? Think again. Sphagnum is maintaining permanent moistness up in here. 
	3. Oh! They also don't decay. When plants die, bacteria and worms eat em and poop out CO2 and other bioavailable nutrients. Good for everyone! not sphagnum though. They just die and sit there. They don't need the nutrients, since they can just react with the soil, so what do they care? Let me just die and not decompose. Slowly building up layers of my dead bretheren in this pit until it's all just a giant pile of acid mud. 
7. So sphagnum finds a pit. They start doing their thing, turning the soil into acidic sphagnum poop that makes it uninhabitable to anyone else. Then they die, piling up, making the soil even more uninhabitable to anyone but their spawn, and the cycle repeats. Eat, poop, die, less oxygen, less competition, more for sphagnum. sphagnum spawn. more eat. more poop. more die. more less oxygen. more less competition. MORE SPHAGNUM. it never ends.

Water can't escape. Sphagnum grows. The pH just keeps dropping -- Peat bogs are roughly as acidic as vinegar(!)--there's not even any bacteria in there! (bacteria need oxygen too). Literally devoid of oxygen. Nothing decomposes. Like literally nothing. Get a load of [this guy](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/ancient/tolland-man.html)! Nothing lives there either, except for some very resilient types of sparse grass, carnivorous plants (Apparently it's how they evolved in the first place! No soil nutrients so they were like "_fine we'll just eat bugs then_"), and the occasional suicidal caribou or moose.  

BUT! because nothing rots, that means nothing is decomposing to `someting + CO2 + heat`. It just... stays there. In fact. ONE THIRD of all of the world's soil carbon is stored in peat bogs. [THEY STORE MORE ATMOSPHERIC CARBON THAN ALL OF THE WORLDS FORESTS COMBINED](https://iucn.org/resources/issues-brief/peatlands-and-climate-change). It also means that you can find [edible hunks of 1000+ year old butter](https://www.irishtimes.com/news/for-peat-s-safe-bog-butter-unearthed-with-turf-1.583009) , which is neat. 

so they store one third of all of the CO2 on the planet, more than all the trees combined. so naturally we said "neat! let's drain it for agriculture and burn it" 

anyway. this is a bad idea? not for the sphagnum. they're evil. They will also be fine. bogs are fine. sphagnum is fine. it's us that should be scared. BEWARE THE BOG

