---
layout: post
title: notes on traveling to germany
---

The below is a brief collection of notes written in reflection on 10 days spent in Bavaria. I stayed mostly in a small town called Utting am Ammersee (Utting on Ammer-lake) with Elise’s grandparents, interposed with a weekend in Vienna and a day trip into Munich. 

### on Bavaria 
Bavaria is a state, a geographical region, a culture, a cuisine, and (more or less) a language. A loose analog would be if the American south was its own federal state, a looser analog is Texas. 

Culturally and geographically it has more in common with parts of Austria than other parts of Germany, and it ended up as part of the modern German republic (as opposed to becoming another small-ish German-speaking nation like Switzerland or Austria) mostly because of a weak national government around the time that Prussia annexed most of the German city states. At the time, Bavaria was the second largest kingdom in Germany.  

The folks I spoke to made many generalizations about Bavaria - I can’t recall there being that many instances of anyone directly opposing Bavaria to Germany, but often in conversation with elise’s grandparents they would say “in Bavaria, we […]” instead of saying “in Germany”. I didn’t see a single German flag in Utting, but there were plenty of Bavarian ones. All of this is to say that most of the observations I’ve made about Germany, to the extent that they can be considered generally valid at all in such a large country, are limited to observations about Bavaria and bavarian culture.  It’s also to note that much of what follows should be considered in the context of the thread of cultural identity that runs from the Bavarian principality of the Holy Roman Empire all the way to the modern day Bavarian state. 

### Utting Am Ammersee: Saturday 13- Monday 15 
Arrived in Munich Saturday morning. Our flight was probably 50% Germans or German speaking people and 50% tourists, give or take. 

The airport was big, open, and had lots of window's. It was also quiet, though this is probably just because we landed in the international arrivals wing which is usually isolated from the rest of the airport and comparatively less busy.  I noticed that it seemed particularly clean - no smells.   Most American airports, save for the very new ones, have a particular sort of smell in them. I don’t know if this is a function of newness or the presence of funding (it probably is) or a function of something else more cultural. 

Getting through customs took no time at all. We didn’t have to declare anything or fill out a form. A German man asked me where I was going, I answered, and we proceeded to baggage claim. 

It took quite a while to get our bags. I didn’t think that there was a procedural delay (like they were waiting for a truck or something), since bags were always coming down the conveyor belt; they were just coming slowly. Like one bag every minute. I joked that the airline workers were taking smoke breaks or something. 

Ate in a cafe outside of baggage claim. The quality of food in this cafe was about at par with a mid tier restaurant in Austin. I ate a sandwich and had a coffee; this meal cost about 60% what it would have in the US. 

Elises grandparents were to pick us up in Geltendorf, a larger town outside of Utting closer to Munich. It has a larger train station and connects to more interregional routes (The train in Utting is small and only goes to other towns near the lake). So we took the S-Bahn from the airport to Geltendorf. It was reasonably easy to buy tickets, and we got the first train out. It was an hour and a half through Munich and into the country. The train was exceptionally clean and not very crowded. 

It was slightly awkward meeting elise’s grandparents, who were there waiting at the station when we arrived. They don’t speak much English, though they spent a good bit of time learning on Duolingo before I arrived. Elise’s grandma, Gisela (Omi), could hold a conversation. Elise’s grandma, Ecki (Opi) less so, though he’d apparently improved tremendously having had done some Duolingo. He and Gisela had a nightly routine of watching television upstairs and doing their English lessons together. It was quite cute. 

The car ride had some broken English, some extra-animated German (I noted that people would slow down and add in some extra hand gestures when speaking in German so I could follow along), and a lot of smiling - I suppose smiling helps communicate that you know what’s going on, or in the event that you don’t know what’s going on, that you’re engaged and happy to be there. I did a lot of this sort of smiling. 

I was struck first on the drive to Utting (30 minutes or so) by how narrow the roads were. The highway was 4 lanes, which you’d get in America, but there were less exits, less traffic, and all of the major arterial roads had less lanes, smaller shoulders, sidewalks completely separated from the road, and the lanes were much narrower. All in all it seemed safer and generally more pleasant. 

The are was mostly farmland - geographically it compares to maybe upstate New York, if I had to give an American example. Incredibly green, pleasant temperatures, slightly humid, and lots of corn. But the fields were significantly smaller and generally more pleasant looking than the corn fields I’d seen in west Texas or New Mexico. All of the fields were bordered by thick coniferous forests and small, ancient-looking farm houses. The houses that people actually lived in were mostly some sort of stucco with terra cottages tile robes, though they made ample use of what I guess is local wood to create a really timeless appearance. There’d be houses that looked hundreds of years old with solar panels on top of them - this sort of juxtaposition between old and new - ancient and modern was most prominent in Munich, which made it look quite nice, outside of the tourist areas at least. In the old town of Munich there was a massive new train station being built- with a giant pavilion, a park, plenty of solar panels, and lots of glass and metal- right next to a cathedral built in the 1200s. 

We stopped to get strawberries on the way to Gisela and Ekki’s house. The strawberries were both sweeter and tangier than any I’d eaten from a supermarket recently. They were notably much brighter, too. If these were locally grown, I’m surprised that we couldn’t get better or just as good GMO ones in us supermarkets. Maybe ours have been selected for size and weight (as opposed to flavor) to help the per unit economics. Not sure. 

Gisela and Ekki’s house was gorgeous. The main architectural motif was a huge A frame roof built up from the ground-level, on the side of a small hill. It was scaffolded with huge wooden beams and tiled with terra cotta. The house rose up from behind the town pediatricians office (Ekki used to be a doctor). The front door was a thick, solid, dark wood, with a solid-feeling stainless steel handle. The entryway had a giant baroque/romantic style oil portrait of a young woman, framed in a thick, gilded, gothic-style picture frame.  

The house has a good flow to it, in the sense that you felt that stairs were right where you needed them - stairs were used to separate spaces that served different purposes, and didn’t obey any sort of 1st floor-second-floor system. You take a left and walk up to the foyer, turn left again up an open wooden staircase to get to the next floor, walk up a very small staircase at the end of the hall to get to a small office/living area, around the corner from which is another level that could loosely be called an attic. The rooms on the second floor were shaped by the roof, always sloping down to the ground. 

The kitchen was big, open, and very much in the German bauhaus ready- made style. There were cabinets everywhere - and ever single one of them opened and closed smoothly. Perfectly flush to the wall, without a peep from the hinges. The cabinets were some sort of vinyl or butcher block, again a dark wood color, this one more of a chestnut. The stove was induction. Gisela has a penchant for kitschy kitchen decorations, apparently, and so one wall was completely laden with odd posters and signs - one read (translated from German): “a husband and wife are truly married when the husband understands all of the words that his wife doesn’t say” 

Outside of the kitchen the house was a treasure trove of art and artifacts of a life well travelled. There was a collection of owl figures upstairs, that Gisela curated over the years - she said it was because she liked Athena. The glass cabinet had what had to have been at least a couple hundred owl figures - wood, metal, porcelain, all of varying sizes. 

The art was well curated, too. Aside from the occasional (very) grandiose gothic portrait, everything was chic in a worldly sort of way, a kind of “international modern” style that somehow avoided being maximalist or kitschy. There were a series of figures hung in the stairway that I particularly liked. 

The room that elise and I stayed in was small, a little stuffy (it was up against the roof and, like the bathroom, had only one window that opened more like a skylight. As long as there was air flowing it wasn’t bad, but if it rained, the rain would splash through the window, so we had to choose between being stuffy and schwitzy or being comfortable and damp), and filled with what I imagined were the books that for whatever reason didn’t make the cut to appear in the main library downstairs. Some of the books included electronic manuals for computers from the 90s, a speed reading guide, and a gardening book. 

Their main library was another story. It was huge - it took up a 5 tier bookshelf that spanned the entire wall along the living room, and was spilling over with all sorts of oddities. They had a huge philosophy collection- including what I think were some original prints - of Kant, Kierkegaard, nietszche, Schopenhauer, and more (no Hegel though). They had a huge hand bound copy of Faust - the Goethe play - that I now realize I forgot to flip through. Most of the books were in German, apart from a series of books on Art history, the last of which I read a little and accidentally packed in my suitcase. 

Ekki had a large music collection, too. The end of the living room was filled with a massive grad piano, and there were all sorts of old brass and woodwind instruments of varying degrees of ancientness littered about the room. They had a nice record player and 90s-looking receiver with very large speakers. They had a massive jazz and classical CD collection. 

#### Utting am Amersee 

We had an early dinner - mostly salad and bread, and elise and I went on a long walk through the town. Some observations there: 
- visually, it was stunning. Every house was beautiful, but not in the sort of way where they’re over designed and over engineered. They looked like they _fit_. They were built with local materials and followed a similar utilitarian-ish aesthetic theme, with lots of whites and browns, and the occasional green. Most houses had very nice gardens. 
- The roads were incredibly well maintained. Some streets reminded me of the really nice neighborhoods in San Francisco. Good landscaping. Ample walkways. Lots of jasmine trees. All of the signs were oddly clean. 
- It was generally incredibly quiet. The weather wasn’t great, so less people were out, but even on the nicest weekend days there wasn’t too much activity in the neighborhood streets
- The main town was something of a cross between a very nice jersey suburb and European hamlet. Nice streets, lots of parks, but old buildings in the center of town built very close together 
- as a lake town, a lot of commerce in the center was lake-oriented. The main establishment, Strandbahd (swimming beach) was the focal point of activity in the town. There were always families coming and going from there, and a handful of restaurants scattered around the area. It had been the main local watering hole at least since Ekki’s dad was a child. Very much like Barton springs - nice grass lawn on the edge of a natural (and cold)  body of water, framed by stone and concrete walls. There was a large diving platform (with a 10meter high jump) on the edge. 
- The surrounding area was mostly farm land, corn and wheat. You’d see the occasional John Deere here and there. Surrounding hamlets were focalized around churches, in contradiction to Utting which seemed to be more oriented around the lake beach. One hamlet near by that I ran through a couple times seemed much older, which is probably a function of the fact that it was more farm oriented and thus attracted less professionals from Munich and maintained its original population. That town had a giant maypole set up outside a church in the city center. 
	-   Unsure what the significance of the maypole is beyond a celebration of spring, but ekki told me a fun anecdote about how the villages in the area would have a running tradition where boys from one town would plot to steal the other village’s maypole under the cover of night and give it back oupon receipt of ransom (in the form of large amounts of beer). Some of his friends somehow managed to steal the maypole from a Munich prison. 
- There were a couple of really nice biergardens in town, too. They mostly looked like large houses with really large shaded yards. The one we went to I imagine used to be a homestead, and the stables were converted into stands for beer and food. There was a gravel pavilion under the trees with lights hung up. We went there to watch Spain beat England in the euro finals - for a small town, I was impressed by how many people attended. A lot of them were young, too. 
- I was generally confused at how nice the town was given what appeared to be a very sleepy, bucolic sensibility. It didn’t seem to be very connected to any of the major metropolises, and aside from the occasional restaurant and swimming hole, didn’t seem to have any notable tourism business, especially not people outside of Germany. I stayed in a similar town in France, near Nice - vilkefranche sur mer - which was a medieval town built on the coast; it used to be a small merchant village but converted to a mostly tourism focused town at some point. Utting was much much quieter.  I asked some locals about it - literally “where is all the money coming from?” And I was apparently just thinking about the town incorrectly - it was, by now, essentially a suburb of Munich. Most of the houses, all of which were by now incredibly valuable, were owned either by people who grew up there and had since retired, or by their relatives, who had money and jobs in the city. As a result, the town was almost entirely composed of families and seniors, and the commerce in the town center was mostly directed towards them and not tourists - the tourism they did get was often in the form of day trips from people in greater Munich or Frankfurt, anyway, much like a lake town in upstate New York or something like that. 
- The main grocery store was a 20 minute walk from the house, along a main road. We took some gorgeous paths through small gardens and people’s backyards, along the creek, to get there. Most of the houses had small walking paths between their backyards that were public. 
- The grocery store had a good selection of quality food. 25% of the wall space (the entire back end of the grocery) was devoted to bread. The bread in Bavaria was much better than I expected. 
- That said, the meat selection was quite bad. They had some very specialized cuts, like pork knuckles or mutton chops, but had only prepackaged chicken thighs. I meant to roast a chicken one night and had only one choice, a small ish “bio” chicken fed with local corn. 
- Most of the produce seemed fresh, though the selection wasn’t made as presentable as it would be in a us grocery store
- There was little to no “international” food items at all. 

  ***Interpolation: On Breakfast***

  Apparently, Bavarians love breakfast. Or, if they don't love it, it has a _much_ more significance in the retired Bavarian's day than the other two do. I noticed that the word for Breakfast (Frühstück) was the only word that didn't directly translate to {time of day} + "meal" (Dinner: _Abengessen_, literally "evening" (*abend*) + meal (_gessen_). Lunch: _Mittengessen_, "middle" (_Mitten_)+ meal)

  Every morning Gisela would set the table outside in the garden and serve soft boiled eggs, bread, ham, fruit, and yogurt, along with whatever else was left over. We’d eat around 9 or 10 (because of jet lag, I wasn’t great about eating at a consistent time ) and sit in the garden for an hour or so, mostly talking about the weather. Ekki had a knack for predicting the weather every day, probably owing to decades of catamaran racing, ice sailing, and aero-acrobatics (both as a pilot and hang glider). 

With a big breakfast, lunch wasn’t typically a sit down meal. We’d snack on fruit or salad, or whatever was around. Dinner was typically light, too, though we only sat down for dinner a few times. For one meal I roasted a chicken and made a ratatouille with all the summer veggies in season. It wasn’t my best, but cooking in the kitchen was quite a pleasure. The American more of obercomplimeting the food and thanking  just a bit too much when someone cooks for you is alive and well in Bavaria, apparently.

I went for an 8 mile run through the neighboring towns on the second day, in the morning, with elise on the bike. It was quite nice. We finished the run with a swim at “Poliziebahd” (police beach), a little corner jutting out into the lake next to a large meadow. We mostly swam here. 

On the lake - the water was incredible. Crisp and cold, just a bit warmer than Barton springs. It was long and narrow, so you could see across quite easily; on the east end of the lake lay the alps, and in general most of the other side was mountainous - there were a few cathedrals jutting up over the trees that would always get hit quite nicely by the setting sun to the west. The water was incredibly calm, so you could swim out 100m quite easily. Treading water in the middle of the lake with the alps in the distance was very nice. 

There were countless sailboats on the lake, too. Where as in a Texan lake, motor boats would outnumber sailboats by a factor of 10-1, the ratio was reversed here, if not even more heavily in favor of sailboats. It’s apparently difficult to use motor boats on Ammersee because of numerous environmental regulations to protect the forest and surrounding marshland, which is home to countless bird species including sea hawks. On birds, perhaps the first thing I noticed when walking around is that - in contrast even to the quite pristine state parks of Texas - there were noticeably more birds. I got used to it after a few days, but the first time I walked outside I was quite struck by the symphony of different bird calls. Waking up to dozens of different species of birds chirping was quite nice - I ddidnt see any bird watchers in the area (there was a poster of local bird soecies hanging up in the wall by the dining room of Gisela and ejki’s house), but I’d imagine it would be a good place to bird watch. 

We apparently arrived in Utting in the midst of abnormal mosquito outbreak. (elise’s uncle from Hamburg, patrick, called it an “epidemic”). They were everywhere, particularly near the water and in the evening. It was so bad that stores in all of the nearby towns had run out of bug spray. One day, I went for a run at dusk through a nature trail that went through the woods along the lake on one side and the train tracks on the other. When I finished, my back looked like it had been ravaged by Seurat with a red paintbrush. 

There was, of course, no air conditioning, which was mostly not a problem. I think the general lack of reliance on cars, coupled with some pretty tight emission regulations for buses and the cars that people did have, and electric trains, all contributed to a generally much more pleasant air quality. If I had to compare it to a city with notably poor air quality - like Mexico City- I’d say that the air felt lighter … the altitude in CDMX makes the air feel light and crisp, which are adjectives I want to use to explain the sensation of the pure, eco friendly air of semi rural Bavaria, but overall one fatigues less easily, and in general things smelled more pleasant (which is probably more a function of the cleanliness of the city and lack of proximity to trash than it is air quality). My lungs felt great while running, despite the more than occasional indulgence in hand rolled cigarettes, and sleeping under an open window didn’t really seem to bother my allergies or sleep quality at all. 

There’s a certain smell and feeling that a well ventilated house in a moderate climate with no air conditioning has when all of the windows are open. It smells fresh and feels quite nice. I contrast it to the really sterile-feeling metal and concrete refrigerators that I’m accustomed to in Texas - not necessarily better (there’s nothing like sleeping in a freezing cold, allergen-free room in the heat of summer), but different - in a good way. 

Without air conditioning though, there was the occasional problem of smell. Food waste was all out in a compost bin that was left out on the kitchen counter. It usually wasn’t a problem, but occasionally you’d walk downstairs and get a whiff of something funky. Gisela didn’t keep a large trash can (mostly because they reused a lot of containers and composted all their food waste), instead opting for a very small bin lined with a paper or plastic bag reused from the grocery. 

They had an incredibly impressive array of random kitchen appliances. The coffee maker was unlike anything I’d seen before. It was a very tall pair of metal poles that held a glass carafe on top, filled with water, that would heat up and make pour over by dripping the water over beans that you’d put in the middle section surrounded with plastic, dripping the finished product into another short and stout glass carafe at the bottom. We had lots of coffee - I’m generally quite fond of different ways for making liquid caffeine solutions and regrettably didn’t attempt to make coffee in it, mostly because I was too scared to ask. 

### Vienna 
On Tuesday we made a trip into vienna, subsidized by elise's aunt (Ninni) who paid for a couple-nights stay in a hotel in a hip part of town as a birthday present. 

It's close, only about a three and a half hour train ride from Munich. Everyone we spoke to said it was a great choice to go there. My inclination to visit was more or less for sight-seeing purposes - Second only to maybe renaissance florence, vienna in the  early 20th century had maybe the most impressive line up of intellectual powerhouses of any city on the planet. At some point or another, all of these people lived in the city:

- klimt 
- freud 
- beethoven 
- mozart 
- shrodinger 
- boltzmann 
- wittgenstein 
- godel 
- einstein 
- kafka
- marie curie 

granted, i didn't look very hard, but there doesn't seem to be too much literature on why exactly this sort of phenomena happened. I suppose that a simplistic level, it's just a networking effect - you have some smart people that live there, and maybe some others move because the city is attractive and has lots of cafes to hang out in and share ideas with each other. Then, those people start to publish some cool stuff, they get noticed by other smart people, and those smart people want to be in proximity to other smart people and so they move, too. Fast forward a decade and you get a city that punches well above its weight (proportional to population size) in terms of intellectual output. This is more or less the gist of most explanations I could get, which basically boiled down to "...Cafes":

>The Austrian writer Stefan Zweig (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stefan_Zweig) described the Viennese Coffee House as an institution of a special kind, "actually a sort of democratic club, open to everyone for the price of a cheap cup of coffee, where every guest can sit for hours with this little offering, to talk, write, play cards, receive post, and above all consume an unlimited number of newspapers and journals."[4] Zweig in fact attributed a good measure of Vienna's cosmopolitan air to the rich daily diet of current and international information offered in the coffee houses. 

Our train left early Tuesday morning from munich. We got the train from utting to Geltendorf and rode into the münchen hoptbanhopf (central station), which was an impressive building. Underground there was a litany of shops and restaurants (the kind you'd expect in a large international european city transportation center - picture the paris airport), and the main platform was this giant open air expanse with over 30 separate lines, all under a giant glass and metal awning. There were thousands of people milling about (it was a tuesday at rush hour after all) and the walls were lined with more or less interchangeable iterations of the same sort of counter restaurant/deli, serving coffee, bread (lots of pretzels), sandwiches, and sausage. It was relatively easy to navigate using google maps and signs around the station. 

I'd never boarded a busy regional train like this before, so that process was a little daunting. A hundred or so people crowded the platform that the train was scheduled to arrive at (I'd heard trains were usually late in Germany, but in my experience they seemed to be generally on time), and when the train arrived, we formed a fluid sort of flock that funneled into the small train doors. These trains have a first class, second class, and economy. First class had two seats on each side of the aisle with a small lit table in between the chairs. Second class was an alternate between smaller chairs, in paired rows, and tables, with two chairs on either side. I didn't see the economy class, though I do know that at least one difference there is there aren't assigned seats. After finding our car, and our seat (we entered at the opposite end of the train, along with some other folks, and as a result there was a nice hullaboo of people trying to cross paths from opposite ends of the car to get to their seats). Boarding took about 20 minutes.

Our train stopped in a station outside of munich -- some suburb -- Lintz, Saltzburg, Vienna, a few other cities, and ended up in Budapest. We were sat across from a young Hungarian (I think) couple that also got off in Vienna. there were a few delays due to construction on the line, but in general the trip was pain free and quite nice. I'd heard the countryside between Munich and Vienna was supposed to be gorgeous, which it was, but I wonder if that assesment wasn't a little inflated by a sort of Bavarian pride. Also, I wasn't sitting in a window seat. 

The central station in Vienna was in the middle of a very large boulevard with little shade, and it was about 5-10 degrees hotter in Vienna than Munich (though much drier), so when we got off the train there was a literal and metaphorical dazzling effect as we walked out of the station and looked at the town. IN the area that the train station was in, most of the buildings were all of the same style - very parisian-like, all white facades, and lots of old windows. This made the sun reflect off of everything in a way that seemed to make the city sparkle. Rooves of the nicer buildings were laid in bronze, and had oxidized to the point that they were all a very bright shade of green - just like the statue of liberty. 

If munich was an international city of the modern kind - loud, busy, and full of activity, vienna was an international city of the sleepier kind. There was not nearly as much traffic, the roads were narrower, and there were cafes everywhere - every street corner had at least one. It was notably clean, just like Munich and utting, but the cleanness of vienna seemed more impressive in contrast to how old everything was. Every few blocks there was a church, each one older than the next. Plenty of parks, too. 

We took about a 30 minute walk through the town to get to our hotel, a little over a mile and a half. Every time we turned onto a new street, we migrated over to the side with a little more shade - the streets were all close enough together that no matter which way you walked, at least one sidewalk was always shaded. 

The neighborhood we lived in was called Mariahilf, named (I think) after a nearby church -- Mariahilf kirche. 

---
(Pending later additions)
