---
layout: post
title: Identity, illness, and placebo
---
A while back, I watched a show that I think was called the girl in the house across the street from the woman in the window, or something like that (It was meant to be a spoof of a famous horror movie, I think). The protagonist is an aggrieved, alcoholic divorcée whose only daughter died and who has a particularly bad case of (self-diagnosed) [*ombrophobia*](https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22534-ombrophobia-fear-of-rain), ie, she is particularly afraid of the rain. It was a decent show (decent enough to be watched over the course of a single evening), but it's now been a few months since I watched it and I don't think I can really recall anything except 

Since any neurological model that attempts to offer a reliable causal explanation for _why_ someone might be afraid of the rain in a way that generalizes into a treatable disease would be spurious at best, I wondered why we even bothered coming up with the very-official-sounding name for it in the first place, ie, why isn't it enough to just say that some people are more scared of rain than others? How much is her ongoing fear of rain correlated with her having grown to believe that she has a disease that _causes_ fear of rain? 

I'm sort of fascinated by all the sorts of places where this sort of thing crops up, and often end up [writing about it](https://drewchibib.github.io/2024/04/07/how-should-a-marxist-think-about-adhd).  This entry is about the extent to which identifying with an illness _generates_ a perception of symptoms of that illness, at least narratively (in the sense that the subject selectively interprets information in a way that fits the narrative of having the disease), if not also literally (or at least, through a placebo. Don't have a better adverb for that). I plan on adding examples to this entry for a while, and maybe it'll eventually turn into something more polished. 

Diseases are descriptions. Proving causality is hard^[citation needed], and basically [nothing in the universe is singularly caused by another thing](https://gwern.net/everything), so at best, diseases are human-language^[2] theoretical frameworks for explaining a bunch of stuff that we can observe, like fear of the rain, or the presence of a virus which your body responds to with white blood cells and other stuff. The "stuff" itself is a better approximation of what we actually want to deal with, and if medical science had its way, we'd be dealing with a single, treatable, and deterministic cause. But the best we can do is offer up some words, in the same way that when I say "tree", what I _really_ mean is something, like, "that specific jumble of atoms over there," but the best I can do is conjure up a collection of images that me and all the other language-knowing humans associate with trees. ( [Obligatory Wittgenstein reference](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/5740/5740-pdf.pdf) )

But despite the fact that diseases are themselves exclusively descriptive, they're _generative_ when one is diagnosed (formally or otherwise), at least anecdotally: e.g., that rash started itching a _lot_ more after you saw a picture of someone with [Rocky Mountain spotted fever](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rocky_Mountain_spotted_fever) that looked similar to what you previously assumed was some sort of mild new-laundry-detergent-related type of thing. 

---
[^2:] Messy!  